models/embedded-counterfactuals.md, before:

---
layout: model
title: Counterfactuals
model-language: church
---

Should counterfactual reasoning invlove an embedded query?

For the following background knowlege and counterfactual inference, these can give different counterfactual predicitons.

I'm not sure what's driving this difference or what part of this example model is sufficient to show a difference.

Here's the functional causal model of the situation:

![story5.png](../assets/img/story5.png)

A, B, C, and D are all true in the actual world. Counterfactually, if C hadn't been true, then would B have been true?

~~~~
;;;fold:
;;first we have a bunch of helper code to do meta-transforms.. converts name to shadow-name and wraps top-level defines
(define (names model)
  (map (lambda (def)
         (if (is-function-definition? def)
             (first (second def))
             (second def)))
       model))

(define (is-function-definition? def)
  (list? (second def)))

(define (shadow-symbol name)
  (string->symbol (string-append "shadow-" name)))

(define (rename expr from-name to-name)
  (cond [(list? expr) (map (lambda (x) (rename x from-name to-name)) expr)]
        [(eq? expr from-name) to-name]
        [else expr]))

(define (shadow-rename expr name)
  (rename expr name (shadow-symbol name)))

(define (shadow-rename-all expr names)
  (if (null? names)
      expr
      (shadow-rename-all (shadow-rename expr (first names))
                         (rest names))))

(define (make-shadow-defines model)
  (define ns (names model))
  (map (lambda (def)
         (if (is-function-definition? def)
             (shadow-rename-all def ns)
             (let ([name (second def)])
               '(define ,(shadow-symbol name) (if (flip eps) 
                                                  ,(shadow-rename-all (third def) ns) 
                                                  ,name)))))
       model))
;;;

(define eps 0.47) ;; our eps is P(new), L&K "stickiness" is P(old)

(define model 
  '((define uA (flip .75))
    (define uB (flip .75))
    (define uBC (flip .9))))

(define a 'uA)
(define b 'uB)

;; if a is true, so is c. if a is false but b is true, c is true 90% of the time.
(define c '(or ,a (and ,b uBC)))

;; our version
(display (eval
          '(enumeration-query
            ,@model ;; sample actual world

            (condition (and ,a ,b ,c)) ;; condition on actual world states

            ;; return result of querying CF "b" given that CF "c" is not true
            (apply multinomial
                   (enumeration-query
                    ,@(make-shadow-defines model) ;; sample shadow world
                    (condition (not ,(shadow-rename-all c (names model))))
                    ,(shadow-rename-all b (names model)))))))

;; L&K version
(display (eval
          '(enumeration-query
            ,@model ;; sample actual world
            ,@(make-shadow-defines model) ;; sample shadow world

            (condition (and
                        ;; condition on actual world states
                        ,a ,b ,c 
                        ;; at the same time, condition on CF "c" is not true
                        (not ,(shadow-rename-all c (names model)))))

            ,(shadow-rename-all b (names model)))))
~~~~

Lucas & Kemp reported 0.43 as the prediction of their model in this case.

Commit message:

add notes to forest page

models/embedded-counterfactuals.md, after:

---
layout: model
title: Counterfactuals
model-language: church
---

Should counterfactual reasoning invlove an embedded query?

For the following background knowlege and counterfactual inference, these can give different counterfactual predicitons.

Here's the functional causal model of the situation:

![story5.png](../assets/img/story5.png)

A, B, C, and D are all true in the actual world. Counterfactually, if C hadn't been true, then would B have been true?

~~~~
;;;fold:
;;first we have a bunch of helper code to do meta-transforms.. converts name to shadow-name and wraps top-level defines
(define (names model)
  (map (lambda (def)
         (if (is-function-definition? def)
             (first (second def))
             (second def)))
       model))

(define (is-function-definition? def)
  (list? (second def)))

(define (shadow-symbol name)
  (string->symbol (string-append "shadow-" name)))

(define (rename expr from-name to-name)
  (cond [(list? expr) (map (lambda (x) (rename x from-name to-name)) expr)]
        [(eq? expr from-name) to-name]
        [else expr]))

(define (shadow-rename expr name)
  (rename expr name (shadow-symbol name)))

(define (shadow-rename-all expr names)
  (if (null? names)
      expr
      (shadow-rename-all (shadow-rename expr (first names))
                         (rest names))))

(define (make-shadow-defines model)
  (define ns (names model))
  (map (lambda (def)
         (if (is-function-definition? def)
             (shadow-rename-all def ns)
             (let ([name (second def)])
               '(define ,(shadow-symbol name) (if (flip eps) 
                                                  ,(shadow-rename-all (third def) ns) 
                                                  ,name)))))
       model))
;;;

(define eps 0.47) ;; our eps is P(new), L&K "stickiness" is P(old)

(define model 
  '((define uA (flip .75))
    (define uB (flip .75))
    (define uBC (flip .9))))

(define a 'uA)
(define b 'uB)

;; if a is true, so is c. if a is false but b is true, c is true 90% of the time.
(define c '(or ,a (and ,b uBC)))

;; our version
(display (eval
          '(enumeration-query
            ,@model ;; sample actual world

            (condition (and ,a ,b ,c)) ;; condition on actual world states

            ;; return result of querying CF "b" given that CF "c" is not true
            (apply multinomial
                   (enumeration-query
                    ,@(make-shadow-defines model) ;; sample shadow world
                    (condition (not ,(shadow-rename-all c (names model))))
                    ,(shadow-rename-all b (names model)))))))

;; L&K version
(display (eval
          '(enumeration-query
            ,@model ;; sample actual world
            ,@(make-shadow-defines model) ;; sample shadow world

            (condition (and
                        ;; condition on actual world states
                        ,a ,b ,c 
                        ;; at the same time, condition on CF "c" is not true
                        (not ,(shadow-rename-all c (names model)))))

            ,(shadow-rename-all b (names model)))))
~~~~

Lucas & Kemp reported 0.43 as the prediction of their model in this case.

## Notes/Questions

* How do we deal with somehting like, "A because (B because C)" if we don't have an embedded inference?
	- Maybe we could have `shadow-vars` *and* `shadow-shadow-vars`.
* In what kinds of situations would there be a greater difference between the two kinds of models? What's driving this difference?
* Which of these is a better fit to the data?
